anyāvatāranikareṣvanirīkṣitaṃ te
bhūmātirekamabhivīkṣya tadāghamokṣe |
brahmā parīkṣitumanā: sa parokṣabhāvaṃ
ninye'tha vatsakagaṇān pravitatya māyām ||1||
anya-avatāra-nikareṣu-	in the other lot of incarnations
anirīkṣitaṃ te	not having seen Thy
bhūmātirekam-abhivīkṣya	divine majesties (now) seeing
tadā-agha-mokṣe	then (that) in Aghaasura's salvation
brahmā parīkṣitu-manā:	Brahmaa to test (Thee) deciding
sa parokṣabhāvaṃ	he (to) invisibleness
ninye-atha	took then
vatsaka-gaṇān	the herds of calves
pravitatya māyām	extending (his power) of Maayaa
In all the other incarnations of Thee put together, not having seen such majesties as in the salvation of Aghaasura, Brahmaa decided to test Thy powers. He extended his power of Maayaa, illusion, and took the herds of calves into invisibleness, and hid them.
vatsānavīkṣya vivaśe paśupotkare tā-
nānetukāma iva dhātṛmatānuvartī |
tvaṃ sāmibhuktakabalo gatavāṃstadānīṃ
bhuktāṃstiro'dhita sarojabhava: kumārān ||2||
vatsān-anavīkṣya	the calves not seeing
vivaśe paśupa-utkare	worried, when the group of gopa boys were
tān-ānetukāma iva	them trying to bring back as though
dhātṛ-mata-anuvartī	(but in reality) Brahmaa's intention following
tvaṃ sāmibhukta-kabala:	Thou having a half eaten ball of rice
gatavān-tadānīm	went ,then
bhuktān-tiro'dhita	while they were eating, made (them) to disappear
sarojabhava: kumārān	the lotus -born Brahmaa, the boys
The Gopa boys were worried by the disappearance of the calves. As though trying to bring them back, Thou went away from there with a half eaten ball of rice in hand. In reality, Thou made it convenient for Brahmaa to carry out his intention, who then made the boys also disappear while they were eating food.
vatsāyitastadanu gopagaṇāyitastvaṃ
śikyādibhāṇḍamuralīgavalādirūpa: |
prāgvadvihṛtya vipineṣu cirāya sāyaṃ
tvaṃ māyayā'tha bahudhā vrajamāyayātha ||3||
vatsāyita:-tadanu	assuming the form of the calves, thereupon
gopagaṇāyita:-tvaṃ	assuming the form of the gopa boys, Thou
śikya-ādi-	sling etc.,
bhāṇḍa-muralī-	vessels, flutes,
gavala-ādi-rūpa:	horns etc., forms taking
prāk-vat-vihṛtya	like before playing around
vipineṣu cirāya	in the woods for long
sāyaṃ tvaṃ	in the evening Thou
māyayā-atha bahudhā	by Thy power, then, in many forms
vrajam-āyayātha	to Gokula returned
There upon by Maayaa Thou assumed the form of the calves and the boys adorned with slings, vessels, flutes horns etc., and played around in the woods for long. In the evening in those many forms Thou returned to Gokul.
tvāmeva śikyagavalādimayaṃ dadhāno
bhūyastvameva paśuvatsakabālarūpa: |
gorūpiṇībhirapi gopavadhūmayībhi-
rāsādito'si jananībhiratipraharṣāt ||4||
tvām-eva	Thee alone
śikya-gavala-ādi-mayaṃ	in the form of slings and horns
dadhāna:	holding (carrying)
bhūya:-tvam-eva	again Thee alone
paśu-vatsaka-bāla-rūpa:	in the form of the calves and boys
go-rūpiṇībhi:-api	and also (by Thee) in the form of cows
gopa-vadhūmayībhi:	and (by Thee) in the form of Gopikas
āsādita:-asi	were received (welcomed)
jananībhi:-	by the mothers
ati-praharṣāt	with great joy
Thou alone were in the form of the slings and horns held by the gopaa boys who were also Thou alone in their form. The cows and calves were also Thy form alone. The mothers, that is, the Gopikas and cows received the gopa boys and the calves with great joy and love.
jīvaṃ hi kañcidabhimānavaśātsvakīyaṃ
matvā tanūja iti rāgabharaṃ vahantya: |
ātmānameva tu bhavantamavāpya sūnuṃ
prītiṃ yayurna kiyatīṃ vanitāśca gāva: ||5||
jīvaṃ hi kiñcit-	some 'jeevas' alone
abhimāna-vaśāt-	by the sense of 'I'ness
svakīyaṃ matvā	ones own taking
tanūja iti	as son, thus,
rāgabharaṃ vahantya:	attachment enduring
ātmānam-eva tu	the self alone indeed
bhavantam-avāpya	Thyself getting
sūnuṃ prītim	(as) son affection
yayu:-na kiyatīṃ	attained not to what extent
vanitā:-ca gāva:	the Gopikas and the cows
The Gopikas and the cows were greatly attached to the jeevas born as their issues, because of the sense of 'I'ness and 'mine'ness. This is a universal notion. By getting Thee as their off-springs, sons and calves, what extreme happiness and thrill of joy did they not get!
evaṃ pratikṣaṇavijṛmbhitaharṣabhāra-
niśśeṣagopagaṇalālitabhūrimūrtim |
tvāmagrajo'pi bubudhe kila vatsarānte
brahmātmanorapi mahān yuvayorviśeṣa: ||6||
evaṃ pratikṣaṇa-	in this manner every moment
vijṛmbhita-harṣabhāra-	increased intense joy
niśśeṣa-gopagaṇa-	by all the Gopas
lālita-bhūrimūrtim	served (Thee, in) the multifarious forms
tvām-agraja:-api	Thee, (Thy) elder brother (Balaraam) also
bubudhe kila	realised indeed
vatsara-ante	at the end of a year
brahmātmana:-api	(the two of Thou) even being of the nature of Brahman
mahān yuvayo:	great, in the two of Thou
viśeṣa:	(Thou) are different, special
In this manner, day by day, every moment the Gopas served Thee in Thy many forms with ever increasing joy. Even Thy elder brother Balaraam could not realize that it was Thou in the various forms till the end of one year. Though Thou two are in reality of the nature of Brahman, there is a vast difference. Thou are special.
varṣāvadhau navapurātanavatsapālān
dṛṣṭvā vivekamasṛṇe druhiṇe vimūḍhe |
prādīdṛśa: pratinavān makuṭāṅgadādi
bhūṣāṃścaturbhujayuja: sajalāmbudābhān ||7||
varṣa-avadhau	at the end of one year
nava-purātana-	new and old
vatsapālān	the calves and cowherds
dṛṣṭvā vivekam-asṛṇe	seeing and being unable to distinguish
druhiṇe vimūḍhe	Brahmaa was stupefied
prādīdṛśa: pratinavān	(Thou) revealed each of the new ones
makuṭa-aṅgada-ādi bhūṣān-	with diadems, shoulder ornaments and other adornments
caturbhuja-yuja:	with four arms
sajala-ambuda-ābhān	and of water bearing cloud's hue
At the end of one year, Brahmaa was stupefied as he could not distinguish which set of cowherds and calves were the old ones and which were the new ones. Thou revealed to him each of the new ones by making him see them with diadems, shoulder ornaments and other adornments.They even had four arms and the hue of water bearing clouds, like Thee.
pratyekameva kamalāparilālitāṅgān
bhogīndrabhogaśayanān nayanābhirāmān |
līlānimīlitadṛśa: sanakādiyogi-
vyāsevitān kamalabhūrbhavato dadarśa ||8||
pratyekam-eva	each one of them, (he saw) as
kamalā-parilālita-aṅgān	by Lakshmi were caressed (whose) limbs
bhogīndra-bhoga-śayanān	on Aadishesha's hoods who were reclining
nayana-abhirāmān	the delightful sights
līlā-nimīlita-dṛśa:	sportingly closing the eyes
sanaka-ādi-yogi-	by Sanaka and other sages
vyāsevitān	attended upon
kamalabhū:-	the lotus born Brahmaa
bhavata: dadarśa	as Thee saw
The lotus born Brahmaa saw each one of them as Thee alone. As Him whose limbs were caressed by Goddess Lakshmi, who was reclining on Aadishesha's hoods, a delightful sight to the eyes, as His eyes were sportingly closed as though in Yoga Nidraa. The Sanaka and other sages were attending on Him.
nārāyaṇākṛtimasaṃkhyatamāṃ nirīkṣya
sarvatra sevakamapi svamavekṣya dhātā |
māyānimagnahṛdayo vimumoha yāva-
deko babhūvitha tadā kabalārdhapāṇi: ||9||
nārāyaṇa-ākṛtim-	the form of Naaraayana
asaṃkhyatamāṃ	innumerable
nirīkṣya sarvatra	seeing every where
sevakam-api	as an attendant also
svam-avekṣya dhātā	himself seeing Brahmaa
māyā-nimagna-hṛdaya:	in Maayaa submerged mind
vimumoha yāvat-	(by Maayaa) totally overpowered, by then
eka: babhūvitha tadā	one (Thou) became then
kabala-ardha-pāṇi:	with a half eaten ball of rice in hand
Brahmaa saw the innumerable forms of Naaraayana everywhere. He saw himself as an attendant. His mind was totally overpowered by Maayaa and he was completely confused. Then Thou became one, holding a half eaten ball of rice in hand.
naśyanmade tadanu viśvapatiṃ muhustvāṃ
natvā ca nūtavati dhātari dhāma yāte |
potai: samaṃ pramuditai: praviśan niketaṃ
vātālayādhipa vibho paripāhi rogāt ||10||
naśyan-made tadanu	with humbled pride, thereafter
viśvapatiṃ muhu:-	to the Lord of the universe, again and again
tvām natvā	to Thee prostrating
ca nūtavati dhātari	and praising, Brahmaa
dhāma yāte	having gone home
potai: samaṃ pramuditai:	with the boys rejoicing
praviśan niketaṃ	(Thou) entered the house
vātālayādhipa vibho	O Dweller of Guruvaayur and Lord of the Universe
paripāhi rogāt	save me from ailments
Brahmaa, whose pride was humbled, prostrated to Thee, the Lord of the Universe, again and again. He praised Thee and went home. Then Thou also entered the house joyfully and rejoicing with the boys. O Thou the Dweller of Guruvaayur! And the Lord of the Universe! save me from my ailments.